JAVA SERVLET:
Servlet is a java programming language which runs on server side only.

Advantage:
Platform neutral
It is robust and secured
It can be used for distributed object oriented programming language
Its coding is very complex and not easy to understand.
Its performance level is very high and can run any operating system.

Uses:
Servlet is mostly used for -
1)User Identification and user authorization
2) You can use your business logic in application

Servlet Life Cycle:

The servlet life cycle is depends on following methods:
1) init()
2) service()
3) destroy()

When a user makes a request towards the server, the servlet inside the webserver get instantiated and accept the client request and makes its request object. After accepting request the webserver process the client request and invoke a response object. After creating response object the server nevigate the data in html format and sends to the client.

Hierarchy of the Servlet:
The servlet classes are-
1) Generic servlet
2) Http servlet
The generic servlet is based on protocol independent.
Whereas http servlet is based on protocol dependent.

Session Tracking:
It is the ability to keep track of a single user sequential request.
Types:
1)URL rewriting 2) HiddenFormFields
3)Cookies
4)Secure Socket Layers

1) URL rewriting: In this the token is embeded in each URl. The server adds the extra path information in each url page. When the client submits request using such url the token is transmitted to the server.

2)Hidden Form Fields: This is similar to URL rewriting, instead of rewriting each url the server embeds hidden field in each form. When the client submits the form, the additional field also sent in the request. The server can use these parameter to establish and maintain a session.

3)Cookies: It is a small peice of code generated by the server and stored in the client machine. It has an ability to maintain the state information. The information saved in the cookie is  1)Name 2) Value 3) Expiration date and
4) Domain and path.

4) Secure Socket Layer session: SSL is used in HTTPS protocol. SSL allows client to maintain an encrypted connection between client and servers. In this process both client and server generate session keys which are symmetric keys used for encrypting and decrypting messages. Servers based on HTTPS protocol can use client's symmetric key to establish a session.

