
ASP Procedures
ASP Forms
ASP Cookies
ASP Session
ASP Application
ASP #include
ASP Global.asa
ASP Send e-mail

ASP Objects
ASP Response
ASP Request
ASP Application
ASP Session
ASP Server
ASP Error
ASP FileSystem
ASP TextStream
ASP Drive
ASP File
ASP Folder
ASP Dictionary
ASP ADO

ASP Components
ASP AdRotator
ASP BrowserCap
ASP Content Linking
ASP Content Rotator

ASP and AJAX
AJAX Intro
AJAX ASP
AJAX Database

ASP Summary
ASP Quick Ref
ASP Summary

ASP Examples
ASP Examples
ASP Quiz
ASP Certificate
ASP Introduction

« PreviousNext Chapter »
An ASP file can contain text, HTML tags and scripts. Scripts in an ASP file are executed on the server.

What you should already know

Before you continue you should have some basic understanding of the following:

HTML / XHTML
A scripting language like JavaScript or VBScript
If you want to study these subjects first, find the tutorials on our Home page.

What is ASP?

ASP stands for Active Server Pages
ASP is a Microsoft Technology
ASP is a program that runs inside IIS
IIS stands for Internet Information Services
IIS comes as a free component with Windows 2000
IIS is also a part of the Windows NT 4.0 Option Pack
The Option Pack can be downloaded from Microsoft
PWS is a smaller - but fully functional - version of IIS
PWS can be found on your Windows 95/98 CD
ASP Compatibility

To run IIS you must have Windows NT 4.0 or later
To run PWS you must have Windows 95 or later
ChiliASP is a technology that runs ASP without Windows OS
InstantASP is another technology that runs ASP without Windows
What is an ASP File?

An ASP file is just the same as an HTML file
An ASP file can contain text, HTML, XML, and scripts
Scripts in an ASP file are executed on the server
An ASP file has the file extension ".asp"
How Does ASP Differ from HTML?

When a browser requests an HTML file, the server returns the file
When a browser requests an ASP file, IIS passes the request to the ASP engine. The ASP engine reads the ASP file, line by line, and executes the scripts in the file. Finally, the ASP file is returned to the browser as plain HTML
What can ASP do for you?

Dynamically edit, change, or add any content of a Web page
Respond to user queries or data submitted from HTML forms
Access any data or databases and return the results to a browser
Customize a Web page to make it more useful for individual users
The advantages of using ASP instead of CGI and Perl, are those of simplicity and speed
Provide security - since ASP code cannot be viewed from the browser
Clever ASP programming can minimize the network traffic
 Note: Because ASP scripts are executed on the server, the browser that displays the ASP file does not need to support scripting at all!
our Windows PC as a Web Server

Your own PC can act as a web server if you install IIS or PWS
IIS or PWS turns your computer into a web server
Microsoft IIS and PWS are free web server components
IIS - Internet Information Server

IIS is a set of Internet-based services for servers created by Microsoft for use with Microsoft Windows.

IIS comes with Windows 2000, XP, Vista, and Windows 7. It is also available for Windows NT.

IIS is easy to install and ideal for developing and testing web applications.

PWS - Personal Web Server

PWS is for older Windows system like Windows 95, 98, and NT.

PWS is easy to install and can be used for developing and testing web applications including ASP.

We don't recommend running PWS for anything else than training. It is outdated and has security issues.

Windows Web Server Versions

Windows 7 (all editions) come with IIS 7.5
Windows Vista Business, Enterprise and Ultimate come with IIS 7
Windows Vista Home Premium comes with IIS 7
Windows Vista Home Edition does not support PWS or IIS
Windows XP Professional comes with IIS 5.1
Windows XP Home Edition does not support IIS or PWS
Windows 2000 Professional comes with IIS 5.0
Windows NT Professional comes with IIS 3 and also supports IIS 4
Windows NT Workstation supports PWS and IIS 3
Windows ME does not support PWS or IIS
Windows 98 comes with PWS
Windows 95 supports PWS
How to Install IIS on Windows 7 and Windows Vista

Follow these steps to install IIS:

Open the Control Panel from the Start menu
Double-click Programs and Features
Click "Turn Windows features on or off" (a link to the left)
Select the check box for Internet Information Services (IIS), and click OK
After you have installed IIS, make sure you install all patches for bugs and security problems. (Run Windows Update).

How to Install IIS on Windows XP and Windows 2000

Follow these steps to install IIS:

On the Start menu, click Settings and select Control Panel
Double-click Add or Remove Programs
Click Add/Remove Windows Components
Click Internet Information Services (IIS)
Click Details
Select the check box for World Wide Web Service, and click OK
In Windows Component selection, click Next to install IIS
After you have installed IIS, make sure you install all patches for bugs and security problems. (Run Windows Update).

Test Your Web

After you have installed IIS or PWS follow these steps:

Look for a new folder called Inetpub on your hard drive
Open the Inetpub folder, and find a folder named wwwroot
Create a new folder, like "MyWeb", under wwwroot
Write some ASP code and save the file as "test1.asp" in the new folder
Make sure your Web server is running (see below)
Open your browser and type "http://localhost/MyWeb/test1.asp", to view your first web page
Note: Look for the IIS (or PWS) symbol in your start menu or task bar. The program has functions for starting and stopping the web server, disable and enable ASP, and much more.

How to install PWS on Windows 95, 98, and Windows NT

For Windows 98: Open the Add-ons folder on your Windows CD, find the PWS folder and run setup.exe to install PWS.

For Windows 95 or Windows NT: Download "Windows NT 4.0 Option Pack" from Microsoft, and install PWS.

Test your web as described above.

How to install IIS on Windows Server 2003

When you start the Windows Server 2003, you should see the Manage Your Server wizard
If the wizard is not displayed, go to Administrative Tools, and select Manage Your Server
In the wizard, click Add or Remove a Role, click Next
Select Custom Configuration, click Next
Select Application Server role, click Next
Select Enable ASP.NET, click Next
Now, the wizard may ask for the Server 2003 CD. Insert the CD and let it run until it is finished, then click the Finish button
The wizard should now show the Application Server role installed
Click on Manage This Application Server to bring up the Application Server Management Console (MMC)
Expand the Internet Information Services (IIS) Manager, then expand your server, and then the Web Sites folder
You should see the Default Web Site, and it should not say (Stopped)
IIS is running!
In the Internet Information Services (IIS) Manager click on the Web Service Extensions folder
Here you will see that Active Server Pages are Prohibited (this is the default configuration of IIS 6)
Highlight Active Server Pages and click the Allow button
ASP is now active!


Write Output to a Browser

An ASP file normally contains HTML tags, just like an HTML file. However, an ASP file can also contain server scripts, surrounded by the delimiters <% and %>.

Server scripts are executed on the server, and can contain any expressions, statements, procedures, or operators valid for the scripting language you prefer to use.

The response.write Command

The response.write command is used to write output to a browser. The following example sends the text "Hello World" to the browser:

Example

<html>
<body>
<%
response.write("Hello World!")
%>
</body>
</html>

There is also a shorthand method for the response.write command. The following example also sends the text "Hello World" to the browser:

Example

<html>
<body>
<%
="Hello World!"
%>
</body>
</html>

Show example »

Using VBScript in ASP

You can use several scripting languages in ASP. However, the default scripting language is VBScript:

<html>
<body>
<%
response.write("Hello World!")
%>
</body>
</html>
The example above writes "Hello World!" into the body of the document.

Using JavaScript in ASP

To set JavaScript as the default scripting language for a particular page you must insert a language specification at the top of the page:

<%@ language="javascript"%>
<html>
<body>
<%
Response.Write("Hello World!")
%>
</body>
</html>
Note: JavaScript is case sensitive! You will have to write your ASP code with uppercase letters and lowercase letters when the language requires it.




